National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Lahore Campus 
Course: Advance Database Concepts Course Code: CS4064 Program: BS Semester: Spring 2026 Out Date: 23-Mar-2026 Total Marks:   
Due Date: Tue 31-Mar-2026 Weight: 
Page(s): 2 
Assignment: 3 (Indexing Structures) 
Instructions: • Use any valid assumption where needed. 
• You are required to submit the soft copy of your assignment at GCR. 
• For any queries, please contact your TA. 
Take the following assumptions for the block size and order file size to solve the questions: 
Q1. Block Size B= 8192 bytes and File Records (fixed length and un-spanned) r= 10billion 
Q2. Block Size B= 4096 bytes and File Records (fixed length and un-spanned) r= 100million 
A block pointer (P) is 6 bytes long and a record pointer (PR) is 7 bytes long. Record length (R) is 150 bytes long and assume  that the size of each field is 10 bytes long. 
a. Suppose that the file is ordered by the key field OrderNo and we want to construct a primary index on OrderNo. Calculate  (i) the index blocking factor bfri (which is also the index fan-out fa); (ii) the number of first-level index entries and the  number of first-level index blocks; (iii) the number of levels needed if we make it into a multilevel index; (iv) the total  number of blocks required by the multilevel index; and (v) the number of block accesses needed to search for and retrieve  a record from the file given its OrderNo value using the primary index. 
b. Suppose that the file is not ordered by the key field OrderNo and we want to construct a secondary index on OrderNo.  Repeat the previous (part a) for the secondary index and compare it with the primary index. 
c. Suppose that the file is not ordered by the non-key field CustID and we want to construct a secondary index on CustID,  with an extra level of indirection that stores record pointers. Assume there are 50,000 distinct values of CustID and that  the Order records are evenly distributed among these values. Calculate (i) the index blocking factor bfr, (which is also the  index fan-out fa); (ii) the number of blocks needed by the level of indirection that stores record pointers; (iii) the number  of first level index entries and the number of first-level index blocks; (iv) the number of levels needed if we make it into  a multilevel index; (v) the total number of blocks required by the multilevel index and the blocks used in the extra level  of indirection; and (vi) the approximate number of block accesses needed to search for and retrieve all records in the file  that have a specific CustID value, using the index. 
d. Suppose that the file is ordered by the non-key field CustID and we want to construct a clustering index on CustID that  uses block anchors (every new value of CustID starts at the beginning of a new block). Assume there are 50,000 distinct  values of CustID and that the Order records are evenly distributed among these values. Calculate (i) the index blocking  factor bfr, (which is also the index fan-out fa); (ii) the number of first-level index entries and the number of first-level  index blocks; (iii) the number of levels needed if we make it into a multilevel index; (iv) the total number of blocks  required by the multilevel index; and (v) the number of block accesses needed to search for and retrieve all records in  the file that have a specific CustID value, using the clustering index (assume that multiple blocks in a cluster are  contiguous). 
e. Suppose the file is not ordered by the key field OrderNo and we want to construct a B+-tree access structure (index) on  OrderNo. Calculate (i) the orders p and p leaf of the B+-tree; (ii) the number of leaf-level blocks needed if blocks are  approximately 70% full (rounded up for convenience); (iii) the number of levels needed if internal nodes are also 70% full 
(rounded up for convenience); (iv) the total number of blocks required by the B+-tree; and (v) the number of block  accesses needed to search for and retrieve a record from the file--given its OrderNo value--using the B+-tree. 
f. Repeat (part e), but for a B-tree rather than for a B+-tree. Compare your results with the B+-tree.  
Q3. Consider a DBMS that has the following characteristics: 
• 4KB fixed-size blocks 
• 6-bytes block pointer and 7-bytes record pointer 
• 50-bytes block headers 
We want to build an index on a search key that is 10 bytes long. Calculate the maximum number of records we can index  with a 
a. 4 Level B+- tree index (including the root level) 
b. 4 Level B-tree index (including the root level) 
Q4. Assume an un-ordered relation Customer (CustID, Rating, Age) is given with CustID as a key attribute and the data  types of all attributes are integer. Size of the relation is 15,000 data blocks. Assume there is a four-level of B+-tree index  exist on CustID attribute. Moreover, one node of the B+-tree is stored in one block on the disk. Take any valid assumption  where needed.  
Estimate the number of block fetches needed to compute the following queries: 
a. SELECT * FROM Customer WHERE CustID= 200; 
b. SELECT age FROM Customer WHERE CustID= 200 AND Rating= 1; 
c. SELECT * FROM Customer WHERE CustID IN (210, 220, 230); 
d. SELECT CustID, age FROM Customer WHERE Rating= 1; 
e. SELECT * FROM Customer WHERE CustID>= 200; 
f. SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Customer WHERE CustID>= 200;